Final component of differential risk section! (#652)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/08.transmission.md

#### Access to Treatment

Finally, COVID-19 outcomes can be influenced by access to healthcare.
Receiving care for COVID-19 can, but does not always, include receiving a positive test for the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
For example, it is common to see treatment guidelines for suspected cases regardless of whether the presence of SARS-CoV-2 has been confirmed (e.g., [@doi:10.1016/j.ajem.2020.03.036]).
Whether and where a patient is diagnosed can depend on their access to testing, which can vary both between and within countries.
In the United States, it is not always clear whether an individual will have access to free testing [@url:https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2020/06/19/880543755/insurers-may-only-pay-for-coronavirus-tests-when-theyre-medically-necessary; @url:https://www.commonwealthfund.org/blog/2020/private-health-insurance-coverage-covid-19-public-health-emergency].
The concern has been raised that more economic privilege is likely to correspond to increased access to testing, at least within the United States [@doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2020.04.046].

> This is supported by the fact that African Americans seem to be more likely to be diagnosed in the hospital, while other groups were more likely to have been diagnosed in ambulatory settings in the community [@doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00598].

Author: ```suggestion
This is supported by the fact that African Americans seem to be more likely to be diagnosed in the hospital, while individuals from other groups were more likely to have been diagnosed in ambulatory settings in the community [@doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00598].
```

Any delays in treatment are a cause for concern [@doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2020.04.046], which could potentially be increased by an inability to acquire testing because in the United States, insurance coverage for care received can depend on a positive test [@url:https://www.hrsa.gov/coviduninsuredclaim/frequently-asked-questions].

Another important question is whether patients with moderate to severe cases are able to access hospital facilities and treatments, to the extent that they have been identified.

> Early findings from China as of February 2020 suggested the COVID-19 mortality rate to be much lower in the most developed regions of the country [@doi:10/ggqscd].

Author: If anyone is able to access the Chinese CDC report, it might have more info: <http://2019ncov.chinacdc.cn/2019-nCoV/> but I can't get it to load. The correspondence in the Lancet (cited) doesn't go into how they conducted testing.

```suggestion
Early findings from China as of February 2020 indicated that the COVID-19 mortality rate might be lower in the most developed regions of the country [@doi:10/ggqscd], although it's not clear whether this discrepancy could be influenced by rates of testing.
```

> Early findings from China as of February 2020 suggested the COVID-19 mortality rate to be much lower in the most developed regions of the country [@doi:10/ggqscd].

Reviewer: I also couldn't get it to load! I think it's OK to just say something like "however reported mortality is generally an estimate of CFR, which is dependent on rates of testing," based on the Lancet report.

> Early findings from China as of February 2020 suggested the COVID-19 mortality rate to be much lower in the most developed regions of the country [@doi:10/ggqscd].

Reviewer 2: ![ChinesesCDC](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/62627112/96650547-0d105000-1301-11eb-9511-db63b3baeded.png)

> Early findings from China as of February 2020 suggested the COVID-19 mortality rate to be much lower in the most developed regions of the country [@doi:10/ggqscd].

Reviewer 2: I loaded it but it wasn't helpful as you can see :D

> Early findings from China as of February 2020 suggested the COVID-19 mortality rate to be much lower in the most developed regions of the country [@doi:10/ggqscd].

Author: Thank you so much for trying, @RLordan! I am definitely not sure how to interpret that, haha.

Thanks @SiminaB for the feedback on the text!
```suggestion
Early findings from China as of February 2020 suggested the COVID-19 mortality rate to be much lower in the most developed regions of the country [@doi:10/ggqscd], although reported mortality is generally an estimate of CFR, which is dependent on rates of testing.
```

Although it is generally considered unethical to consider demographic factors such as age, sex, race, or ethnicity while making such decisions, and ideally this information would not be shared with triage teams tasked with allocating limited resources among patients [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1764137], there are substantial concerns about implicit and explicit biases against older adults [@doi:10.1111/jgs.16539], premature infants [@doi:10.1111/apa.15334], and people with disabilities or comorbidities [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1764138; @doi:10.2105/AJPH.2020.305837; @doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1764137].
Because of the greater burden of chronic disease in populations subjected to systemic racism, algorithms intended to be blind to race and ethnicity could, in fact, reinforce systemic inequalities caused by structural racism [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1777347; @doi:10.1016/j.jnma.2020.05.010; @doi: 10.1056/NEJMp2023616].
Because of this inequality, it has been argued that groups facing health disparities should be prioritized by these algorithms [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795538].

> This approach would carry its own ethical concerns, especially because many of the scarce resources that need to be distributed do not have well-established risks and benefits [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795538].

Author: ```suggestion
This approach would carry its own ethical concerns, including the fact that many resources that need to be distributed do not have well-established risks and benefits [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795538].
```

For example, remdesivir, discussed below, is an antiviral produced by Gilead that has shown some promise for alleviating symptoms and reducing the duration of hospitalization.
Remdesivir is currently available for the treatment of COVID-19 under compassionate use guidelines and through expanded access programs, and in many cases has been donated to hospitals by Gilead [@doi:10.1016/j.mayocp.2020.06.016; @doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795529].
Regulations guiding the distribution of drugs in situations like these typically do not address how to determine which patients receive them [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795529].
Prioritizing marginalized groups for treatment with a drug like remdesivir would also be unethical because it would entail disproportionately exposing these groups to a therapeutic that may or not be beneficial [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795538].
On the other hand, given that the drug is one of the most promising treatments available for many patients, using a framework that tacitly feeds into structural biases would also be unethical.

> At present, the report prepared for the Director of the CDC by Ethic Subcommittee of the CDC fails to address the complexity of this ethical question given the state of structural racism in the United States, instead stating that "prioritizing individuals according to their chances for short-term survival also avoids ethically irrelevant considerations, such as race or socioeconomic status" [@url:https://www.cdc.gov/about/advisory/pdf/VentDocument_Release.pdf].

Reviewer: Ethic -> Ethics

Author: ```suggestion
At present, the report prepared for the Director of the CDC by Ethics Subcommittee of the CDC fails to address the complexity of this ethical question given the state of structural racism in the United States, instead stating that "prioritizing individuals according to their chances for short-term survival also avoids ethically irrelevant considerations, such as race or socioeconomic status" [@url:https://www.cdc.gov/about/advisory/pdf/VentDocument_Release.pdf].
```

A major concern in many countries has been the saturation of healthcare systems due to the volume of COVID-19 hospitalizations (e.g., [@doi:10.1073/pnas.2004064117]).
Similarly, there have been shortages of supplies such as ventilators that are critical to the survival of many COVID-19 patients, leading to extensive ethical discussions about how to allocate limited resources among patients [@doi:10.19044/esj.2020.v16n21p24; @doi:10.7249/PEA228-1; @arxiv:2008.00374; @doi:10.1016/j.surg.2020.04.044].
Although it is generally considered unethical to consider demographic factors such as age, sex, race, or ethnicity while making such decisions, and ideally this information would not be shared with triage teams tasked with allocating limited resources among patients [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1764137], there are substantial concerns about implicit and explicit biases against older adults [@doi:10.1111/jgs.16539], premature infants [@doi:10.1111/apa.15334], and people with disabilities or comorbidities [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1764138; @doi:10.2105/AJPH.2020.305837; @doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1764137].

> Because of the greater burden of chronic disease in populations subjected to systemic racism, algorithms intended to race and ethnicity could, in fact, reinforce systemic inequalities caused by structural racism [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1777347; @doi:10.1016/j.jnma.2020.05.010; @doi: 10.1056/NEJMp2023616].

Reviewer 3: I think something is missing in this sentence

> Because of the greater burden of chronic disease in populations subjected to systemic racism, algorithms intended to race and ethnicity could, in fact, reinforce systemic inequalities caused by structural racism [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1777347; @doi:10.1016/j.jnma.2020.05.010; @doi: 10.1056/NEJMp2023616].

Author: ```suggestion
Because of the greater burden of chronic disease in populations subjected to systemic racism, algorithms intended to be blind to race and ethnicity could, in fact, reinforce systemic inequalities caused by structural racism [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1777347; @doi:10.1016/j.jnma.2020.05.010; @doi: 10.1056/NEJMp2023616].
```

Words help!

Because of this inequality, it can be argued that groups facing health disparities should be prioritized by these algorithms [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795538].

> However, this approach would also be rife with ethical concerns.

Reviewer 3: Why is considering these rife but not considering them not? I am missing something

Author: Oh no, they both carry ethical concerns, I was arguing against the "color blind" approach through most of the paragraph! It's a little harder to outline the ethical concerns against non-color-blind algorithms because I didn't find a lot of rebuttals to this idea since it's not really being applied, as far as I can tell. I'll rephrase to make it more clear. 

```suggestion
However, this approach would carry its own ethical concerns.
A report prepared for the Director of the CDC by Ethic Subcommittee of the CDC does not address these concerns, instead stating that "Prioritizing individuals according to their chances for short-term survival also avoids ethically irrelevant considerations, such as race or socioeconomic status" [@url:https://www.cdc.gov/about/advisory/pdf/VentDocument_Release.pdf].
```

> A report prepared for the Director of the CDC by Ethic Subcommittee of the CDC does not address these concerns, instead stating that "Prioritizing individuals according to their chances for short-term survival also avoids ethically irrelevant considerations, such as race or socioeconomic status" [@url:https://www.cdc.gov/about/advisory/pdf/VentDocument_Release.pdf].

Author: ```suggestion
```

The ambiguities surrounding the risks and benefits associated with therapeutics that have been approved under emergency use authorizations also present ethical concerns related to the distribution of resources [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795538].
For example, remdesivir, discussed below, is an antiviral produced by Gilead that has shown some promise for alleviating symptoms and reducing the duration of hospitalization.
Remdesivir is currently available for the treatment of COVID-19 under compassionate use guidelines and through expanded access programs, and in many cases has been donated to hospitals by Gilead [@doi:10.1016/j.mayocp.2020.06.016; @doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795529].
Regulations guiding the distribution of drugs in situations like these typically do not address how to determine which patients receive them [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795529].
Prioritizing marginalized groups for treatment with a drug like remdesivir would also be unethical because it would entail disproportionately exposing these groups to a therapeutic that may or not be beneficial [@doi:10.1080/15265161.2020.1795538].

> On the other hand, given that the drug is one of the most promising treatments available for many patients, using a framework that tacitly feeds into structural biases would also be unethical.

Author: ```suggestion
On the other hand, given that the drug is one of the most promising treatments available for many patients, using a framework that tacitly feeds into structural biases would also be unethical.
At present, the report prepared for the Director of the CDC by Ethic Subcommittee of the CDC fails to address the complexity of this ethical question given the state of structural racism in the United States, instead stating that "[p]rioritizing individuals according to their chances for short-term survival also avoids ethically irrelevant considerations, such as race or socioeconomic status" [@url:https://www.cdc.gov/about/advisory/pdf/VentDocument_Release.pdf].
```
